Sir, We are happy about the new Brahamos you have invented. But why don?t you sir invent things which promotes peace?	First of all strength respects strength. To protect the nation, nation should have adequate strength. Hence we need to equip ourselves with minimum deterrent capability defence. If we have strength and good leadership, then peace in the nation will prevail.
What are the job opportunities in Public and Private sector for us (Speech and Hearing Impaired Students)? 	3 % reservation is allotted for the differently abled persons including speech and hearing impaired students. Certainly now the number of private industries are encouraging and appointing the speech and hearing impaired students such as Sakthi masala in Tamilnadu. Many more industries will identify the right jobs and every one of the students who are having speech and hearing impaired students.
Though India is continuing with corruption, hike in price and economic crisis, can it become a developed country within 2020 as you said? What are the steps to be taken by the youth towards that development?	As a youth of the nation, first and foremost your action is to study well. That is your first responsibility. Regarding corruption and other issues, the reform has to start from our home. If our home is corruption free, our village and city will be corruption free, then our state will be corruption free and the nation will be corruption free. Certainly our leaders should have the wisdom to bring down the price rise and manage the economic crisis.
What is the biggest challenge facing India today and what should we do to contribute positively towards this challenge?	The youth needs to develop an attitude : I can do it! We can do it !! India will do it!!!
what is the secret of success in your life?	Have an aim in life, acquire knowledge through all possible sources, work hard and never accept defeat by the problem, always defeat the problem and succeed.
Commerce or science Stream? If we want to be a scientist in Isro, what are the procedures for it?	ISRO has an institute called Indian Institute Space Sciences and Technology (IIST) at Thiruvananthapuram. The admission into this institute is by a competitive examination for students who are appearing or completed class 12 examination on lines of JEE. The students graduating from IIST are offered scientific jobs at ISRO.
How can we make developments in the field or science and at the same time make the process eco-friendly?	We have to be sensitive in every development about the damage it can cause to the environment and find scientific methods to mitigate these causes. This way we can find eco-friendly scientific applications.
The recent tsunami and earthquake in Japan has cost major nuclear disaster. Will it have any impact on future nuclear development?	There will be impact. Thorium based nuclear reactors may replace the uranium based reactors. Also, the scientific community may look for other alternative renewable resources like solar, wind, and hydro.
From your several achievements, which one do you feel most happy and proud of? What makes the student perfect?	The greatest satisfaction I had was, when we developed a FRO and fitted to polio affected children and they were happily dancing.
How was your experience in the field of space technology?	It was very good. I could participate in developing the first space launch vehicle which has led to many launches and fulfillment of Prof. Vikram Sarabhai vision of the country?s ability to develop any type of satellite and launch it from Indian soil in different orbits.
Who is the person who inspires you a lot?	Prof. Vikram Sarabhai
What thoughts inspired you in your life to become successful?	My primary school teacher teaching, how the birds fly, inspired me to have a vision and aim in life.
Granted that the invention of Chandrayana I and II the PSLV machine has reached to the tremendous heights and has been successful in discovering water on the moon. But what are the implications of such inventions on the common man who remains ignorant of them?	Any scientific mission has a societal relevance. Particularly all the Indian space missions have a societal relevance and contribution to the development of science and technologies. That will benefit the nation development. Whether it is Remote sensing, telecommunication, meteorology or Chandrayan to moon, it has the purpose of serving the humanity as a whole. Country?s development is not only measured how it provides good governance, but all around development including science and technology. India is trying to achieve excellence in all the fields including good governance, Space mission is one of the area where India is doing well.
Your father insisted you to become an IAS but your choice was to become a pilot. Why you deviated from your father?s wish? Its not mentioned anywhere in your book also.	No. My father didn?t insist to become an IAS Officer. It is my teacher Sivasubramania Iyer who made me thing to fly. He gave me the wings to fly.
According to NASSCOM only 30% of our engineering graduates are employable in industries. The industries are the maximum beneficiaries from the technical education. But still their contribution for this cause is not significant. Can Government insist on their adapting technical institutions	It is the responsibility of the institution to produce employable candidates with the necessary skills required for the industry. We need to have a adaptive syllabus to meet the industrial requirements. We need quality teachers, quality laboratories and quality content and good libraries. Certainly 11th plan projection will address these requirements.
The project ?INCREDIBLE INDIA? was an enormous project which even brought us the envy of the first world countries. To which extent has this project been successful and as a student how can I contribute to this project?	Students can contribute for making the environment clean, neighbourhood clean and the city clean, state clean which will certainly make the tourism successful in India.
Of now we are developing country and out 60% of populations are still depend on agriculture what you think for our country we should depend more industrialization or agriculture. What is that youth can do to help our country to go beyond the economy of USA & China	Agriculture is the core competence of India. Certainly India will witness 9 to 10% Agriculture growth rate. We have seen many success stories in India in doubling the food production and achieving 9% growth rate in agriculture. What we need to do is the value addition and agro food processing, while launching the second green revolution movement with system oriented approach towards farming, supporting organic and precision farming in a big way with micro irrigation, drip irrigation and provide quality seeds along with storage and distribution chain with market connectivity. If every youth thing that ?I can do it?, ?We can do it? and ?India can do it? and become an economically developed nation before 2020.
Sir Could you please highlight the main drawbacks for Indian youth not liking basic science as their career, & what would be the best way to popularize the basic science.	Science is a life time mission. Hence India is taking steps to attract the scientific talent and thus created IISER in many regions. I have requested ISRO, DRDO, DAE, CSIR will come out innovative schemes to attract the students towards basic science and research
Will technology replace teachers?	Technology can never replace teacher. A teacher can give value based education to a child, build ethical foundation, nurture creativity and give the child compassion and love. This cannot be replaced by the technology.
The Science and Technology which is present in China is lacking in India. Why?	This is not true. First we should not compare with any country. Our scientific missions are according to the needs of the society and dynamic in nature.
Sir, the present education system focuses mainly on theoretical knowledge and the main stress is on marks. So, isn?t innovation and true talent being backtracked? So can you suggest something regarding this?	Education system need to breed and bring the best of creativity from the students. Learning gives creativity, Creativity leads to thinking, Thinking provides knowledge, Knowledge makes you great. Let me share with you an experience of creating a framework for innovation in a nation. During my recent visit to Finland, I had an opportunity to meet the people from different walks of life in Finland, the political system, educationist, entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. When I met the Prime Minister of Finland, he talked to me about how they overcome the challenges of 1992 crisis situation using the three dimensional model namely having formulating the framework of synergetic education, research, entrepreneurship with venture capital. Finland political leaders, business leaders and academia joined together and decided to transform the nation through innovative education and knowledge products. In this context, Finland has made quality education is available to all citizens free of cost. Next they encourage innovation is primary focus of higher education and research. Risk taking is highly encouraged and appreciated and built the institutions that can primarily provide the venture capital for innovators and their ideas without any collateral security. With this innovation framework, ideas becoming patent, patents becoming technologies, technologies have become products and systems for the global market like Nokia. In India, the education system needs modifications to nurture ground level and practical creativity.
India 2020 is a book that shows us everything you would hope for India. What was the inspiration behind it and what could have been the events that led to book being written.	India Vision 2020, was written with the inspiration to motivate different sections of the society and economy towards common national goals. The chief inspiration was to make India economically developed by 2020 through collective action.
I am the student of 12th grade and as a student next year, will be a new phase of our education and we will face lot of challenges. What will be your advice to translate these challenges into opportunities?	Here, let me now recall famous verses of 13th century Persian Sufi poet Jalaluddin Rumi:Wings to Fly. You were born with potential.You were born with goodness and trust. You were born with ideas and dreams. You were born with greatness. You were born with wings. You are not meant for crawling, so donñt, you have wings. Learn to use them to fly. My message to you, young friends, is that education gives you wings to fly. Achievement comes out of fire in our sub-conscious mind that ?I will win?. So, each one of you assembled here and elsewhere, will have ?Wings of Fire?. The Wing of Fire will indeed lead to knowledge which will make you to fly as a doctor, or an engineer, or a scientist, or a teacher, or a political leader, or a bureaucrat or a diplomat or anything you want to be. You all students can do it.
Space has always fascinated you and us. Is it possible for India to have a personal space station or can India be a part of the next ISS. If India can have a space station, by when do you think it will function and how do we go about it?	I am sure, one day India?s space mission will lead to the creation permanent space based centre. This can have a societal application by being a centre for advanced weather mapping, testing, and space solar power.
We always read about the destructive power of lighting. I would like to know what will happen to the power of lighting when it hits the earth. Does it get washed away by rain water or will it get mixed up with natural resources like minerals etc. to form some other energy.	Lightning has indeed a lot of energy. It is believed that 16 million lightning storms every year. An average bolt of lightning can carry about 1 terawatt of power with current upto 300,000 amperes. When lightning strikes the earth, its energy is immediately dissipated in heat energy and light energy. However, lightning hits the earth for a very short span of time (30 micro seconds) and it is unpredictable. Hence, it is difficult to extract from lightning using current technology.
Which is that one special lesson you have learnt as - A student? - A scientist? - The President of India?	As a student, this is important, have an aim in life and acquire all possible knowledge towards a goal. As a scientist, I learnt that problems will always be there, but with hard work and perseverance, they can be overcome. As a President, I learnt, that for India to be developed, it is paramount that integrated economic development of the 600,000 villages undertaken.
What does the word failure mean to a scientist and what does it mean to a common mean?	When you do a difficult missions, there is always a risk of problem. Problems should not become your captain. You have to be the captain of the problem, defeat the problem and succeed. Here I would like to share an experience about managing failures.
What are the systemic changes that are needed for India to get more institutions like the IITñs and IISc?	Govt is already is in this process. We have increased number of seats in each IIT, IIM and IISc. At the same time, new centres of excellence are being created across the nation.
If you were chosen as the leader of world, what would you do to improve the present condition of the world?	Let me share with you my vision for the nation?s of the world by 2030. Distinctive profile for the Nations of the World in 2030 1.	A world of nations where the divide between rural and urban, rich and the poor, developed and developing has narrowed down. 2.	A world of nations where there is an equitable distribution and adequate access to energy and quality water. 3.	A world where core competencies of each nation are identified. Missions synergizing the core competencies of different nations lead to economic advantage and faster development for all the societies. 4.	A world of nations where all the students of all societies are imparted education with value system. 5.	A world of nations where affordable quality health care is available to all. 6.	A world of nations where the governance is responsive, transparent and corruption free. 7.	A world of nations where crimes against women and children are absent and none in the society feels alienated. 8.	A world in which every nation is able to give a clean green environment to all its citizens. 9.	A world that is prosperous, healthy, secure, devoid of terrorism, peaceful and happy and continues with a sustainable growth path. 10.	A world of nations with creative leadership who ensure effective mechanisms to resolve conflicts between nations and societies in a timely manner keeping overall peace and prosperity of the world as a goal.
What key expectations you want from the students of todays? generation to advance in science and technology and make India a prosperous country?	The youth should make science as a mission and find how science and technology can alleviate the problems of the common man. The next generation of scientists have to be world class and their inventions and discoveries should address the global problems of better nutrition, better quality of water for all, disease free world, and climate change.
Why do you like children?	Because they are vibrant, full of energy, innovative and keen learners. The ignited minds of the youth is most powerful resource on the earth, above the earth and under the earth.
As a visionary what is your opinion regarding the enforcement of Right to Education Act?	Right to Education Bill Assent has been accorded for the 86th Constitution Amendment Act ? Right to Education Bill for children between the age group of 5 and 14 years. But an Act alone cannot achieve the goal unless the education is delivered in a manner, which will take into account the socio-economic reality, and perception of people to whom it is addressed. Apart from attracting children to schools, the education system should be able to provide nourishment and inject creativity among the children. Also the aim of the education system should be to build character, human values enhance the learning capacity through technology and build the confidence among children to face the future.
As students how can we contribute to fulfill your dreams of making India a developed country by 2020?	Have an aim in life, acquire knowledge, work hard and persevere.
As a boy what ambition you had and how did you work towards the goal? Please state some instances or incidents that you went through that can motivate us in achieving the goal to become successful in life?	My primary school teacher Sri Sivasubramania Iyer inspired me through one of his science class. While he was teaching, the way he taught how the birds fly, that incident made me to think of flying high in life. That led to my career prospects and made me to work hard to achieve the goal. Dreams are very important because they will wake you up from sleep and will lead to constant thinking for realizing the dream. Thinking leads to action.
Sir, you said India will be a Developed Nation by 2020 in 2000. Even after 10 years we still have not shown much progress. Do you still think India will be able to realize the dream by 2020?	This is not true. India has made significant progress in many areas and the economy has grown at an average of about 7 to 8% in the last decade. Of course moving ahead in the next ten years, we need innovative ways to achieve development and integrated mission for rural area. This collective action will lead to economically developed nation by 2020.
What do you think Humanity lacks?	We have to evolve a society that will respect differences and celebrate differences. What are the various issues on tolerance? 1.	Tolerance for people?s opinion 2.Tolerance for people?s culture 3.Tolerance for people?s belief system 4.and Tolerance for people?s styles
Sir. How to control the black money invested in the foreign banks for safeguarding our national economy?	Our governance system needs a change and we have to build the system on trust and implant effective mechanism to detect the wrong doings rather than stifling the growth of the spirit of entrepreneurship of every citizen with rules and regulations that have many loop holes for the known to get evaded.
Sir. You are always interested to converse with the children. Why?	Children minds are less biased. I am trying to imbibe the spirit ?I can do it?, ?Courage? and ?Righteousness? among them. So that nation will get the enlightened citizens in the future.
Sir. In spite of high security in our country, the terrorists are attacking the country. How can we control the terrorism?	Wherever people participation in eliminating the terrorism, there you can find terrorism will find it difficult to penetrate. Hence it is essential to increase the awareness among the public and that will help the government agencies in sensing the activities which leads to terrorism.
Sir. In the present scenario, all educated people are interested in software field only. What is its impact on other areas particularly Basic Sciences and its Research fields?	Certainly there is an attraction towards a field which gives employment and wealth. That is nothing wrong. IT Knowledge has brought prosperity to many. Slowly the situation will change. But what will give the long term growth, that is to invest our knowledge and resource in the field of core competence that we posses in the nation and create knowledge wealth (Intellectual Property) that will bring overall sustained growth to the country and to all.
Sir. I want to be like you. What are your ways of attaining this level?	1.Aim in life 2.Acquire knowledge continuously 3.Sweat, Sweat and Sweat 4.Perseverance: Defeat the problem and succeed
Sir. After so many years of working in research field, which sort of research did you find more innovative?	Any research which will bring peace and smile to the 6 billion people of the world. Adequate access to safe drinking water to 6 billion people, Energy generation through renewable sources, solution to the diseases and its prevention with quality healthcare for all, quality education for all and above all peace and prosperity without social imbalances are the prime target for any kind of research.
Sir. If religions are root cause for all kinds of blood shed and turmoil in the world. How the same religions can be made fit into the present scenario of world to make man?s life quite comfortable and peaceful?	If the religions are not there, world would have become nonexistent now. It is not the religion; it is the question of fusion of dogmatism and fundamentalism that erupts into violence and hatred in the minds of the people. When we unite the people with spiritualism in the form of love and affection, certainly the differences will vanish and hatred in the minds will disappear.
Sir. How is zero gravity maintained on earth's surface in laboratory Where astronauts get trained before being going to space?	The space conditions are created in the vacuum chamber created for that purpose and the astronauts are trained in that vacuum chamber, were the Zero Gravity is maintained.
Sir. As we know that Hiroshima and Nagasaki are still suffering from the cause of radiation which was emitted by nuclear explosion. Why the scientists did not take any measure to control it?	Adequate measures are taken to prevent to the maximum extend
Sir. Once you had said that by 2020, India will be a developed country. At present rate, do you think we can surpass China?	We don't have to compare any nation. We are a democratic country, we have certain ups and downs and answerable to parliament. Certainly we are slow, but steady in achieving our mission.
Sir. You are inspiring millions across the globe. Who inspires you?	I was inspired by my teacher ?Siva Subramania Iyer?
Sir. You being an Ambassador for peace and harmony, how do you feel when you are called as ?Missile Man??	That is one Avatar, I worked with my team to strengthen the defence of the nation. Now I am working for world peace through developmental missions.
Sir, Mahatma Gandhiji, Lord Buddha, Lord Mahavira and like have stressed on ? Non-violence and peace?. Then, is there any need of doing huge investments on nuclear weapons in the name of defence?	Strength respect strength. Out of 5000 years of Indian history, we have been ruled by foreign powers except 600 years. When many nations carry nuclear weapons in its stock, we cannot do tapas. Hence strength respect strength.
Sir. In the present day context, the brain drain looks to be a lucrative preposition for our nation. What is your opinion?	Brain drain is not a problem in india. Nothing wrong when 20 million people out of 1.2 billion goes abroad and work in various capacities to earn knowledge and wealth. Certainly umbilical connectivity with the mother nation will bring knowledge back to the nation.
Sir. Will India become a superpower country in the coming future?	India will become an economically developed nation before the year 2020.
Sir. As a citizen of the country and as a student, what are my responsibilities towards a corruption-free country?	Bhavani Story of Adi Chunchunagari
Sir. Can matter exist inside the black hole?	Scientists believe that may be even the existence of universe is possible within the black hole. Using an adaptation of Einstein?s general theory of relativity, Nikodem Poplawski, of Indiana University, Bloomington, analysed the theoretical motion of particles entering a black hole. He concluded that it was possible for a whole new universe to exist inside every black hole, which could mean that our own universe could be inside a black hole as well. According to Nikodem Poplawski Maybe the huge black holes at the centre of the Milky Way and other galaxies are bridges to different universes.
Sir. With respect to ?Vision 2020?, in your opinion how much we have achieved till present?	We have to only 10 years to go. We have been progressing in service sector and industrial sector with more than 10% growth rate except on agriculture it is only 2% growth rate. We need to focus our energy towards achieving 10% GDP growth and maintain it for a next one decade. There is a good hope that we will achieve it.
Sir, The recent global survey on quality education says that our reputed national institutes are not qualified to compete in top 100 institutes of the world. By what measures our institutes can excel by imparting the world class education?	We need to reorient our higher education system towards research ? teaching ? research. Bring autonomy to the educational institutions in framing the syllabus according to the national priority and demand. Vice chancellors has to be selected based on academic and management performance and merit.
Will India be a Global Power by 2020?	Definitely. India has all the resources, particularly youth resources of more than 500 million people, it's a great resource in a democracy. Youth needs to have confidence; I can do it, that will result into we can do it and Nation will do it.
What is the difference between a Rocket Launcher and Missile Launcher?	Rockets mostly put the satellite in polar orbit for societal application. Missiles deliver the bombs to targets. This is for Defence needs
Are UFO's and Aliens real? During the tenure of your service have you ever come across any of them?	I don't believe in UFO. Of course we are not alone. There are 100 billion galaxy in the universe. Each galaxy will have 100 billion stars and each star may have many planets like earth. Hence, there is a possibility a living beings of various degree of intelligence at least thousands of planets. 
What is your magical formula to be successful in life?	There is no magic. Hard work, hard work and hard work. I suggest four aspects for good performance: Aim in life, acquire knowledge, work hard and perseverance.
Sir, when will India reach its epitome in space research? Is the progress satisfactory? If no, where are we lagging?	We are not in competition with anyone in space research. All our programmes of space research are directed towards societal missions leading to upgradation of quality of life of people. Major effort is on providing communication, resource mapping and meteorology. These areas, we have achieved the vision of Prof. Sarabhai. Now we are going on to Lunar mission and interplanetary exploration.
How interest in science can be promoted among the students?	You should read the life history of noble laureates and find out how they succeeded in their mission when they were young like you and know the details about their discoveries, the troubles they encountered and how they solved. Students must be told about the challenges in science. They should know the value of science. They should become aware of scientific magnanimity and science is a life time mission. These actions will attract the youth to science.
Sir, alcoholism is one of the major problems facing our country. A lot has been done to make people aware about it. But how can we solve this problem, when liquor is easily available everywhere?	Recently, I went to the Lead India Camp at Karimnagar and Medak districts of Andhra Pradesh. Based on my ten point oath, the children have gone to the village to wean away people from the habit of drinking. Three boys and girls came to me and told, how they weaned away their father from the habit of drinking. If children can persuade their parents not to indulge in such activities, there will be no alcoholism in the country, because they have the tool of love.
Sir, why do you love children?	Children they dream. The ignited mind of the youth is the most powerful resource on the earth, under the earth and above the earth. Todayñs children are the hope for the future. Nurturing them is always my priority.
The book that has impressed you the most? Why? How can we change the current education scenario?	Light from many Lamps by Lillian Eichler Watson which has inspired me on many occasions when I was slightly down. The education scenario is constantly changing. There is a concerted effect for injecting creativity among the children studying in the primary school. This will lead to a big change both in secondary education and higher education.
What is your experience about India in the field of Scientific Development? What is your present area of research?	So far India has been concentrating on technology development. Time has now come for India to get into basic research, so that we can develop technologies using our basic research results. This is essential for making India to upgrade itself in the global competitiveness index. This action has already commenced. My present research areas include: (a) finding a solution for cure of mentally retarded and autistic children (b) development of PURA (Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) and (c) application of ICT for remote education and healthcare delivery.
an students play an active role in Politics? What is your opinion about Childrenñs parliament?	As long as they are studying, they should concentrate on their studies and excel. Student should not have time to participate in politics. But after the studentñs life, any interest in politics, they can specialize in the field and enter into. Regarding childrenñs parliament, normally through children parliament, students learn, how our nation is ruled through the Parliamentary decision making process and provides correction for the mistakes and errors in governance. There is nothing wrong in it.
The Society is in the grip of violence. How can the youth play a positive role in its eradication?	I am sure, dear friends you will acquire the following traits: 1. tolerance for people's opinion 2. tolerance for peopleñs culture 3. tolerance for people's belief system 4. and tolerance for peopleñs styles. That means a mature society with enlightened individuals will celebrate the differences of various cultures and live in harmony.
How do you think that we can empower women?	Education, Education and Education of women. All of you should go to the neighbouring villages during holidays and vacation and teach at-least five persons who cannot read and write without affecting your own education.
What will be your advice for the students in India?	They must excel in studies. They should have a clear aim. They should acquire knowledge to reach the aim. Work hard and persevere.
India is planning to launch Space shuttle to moon in 2010. We want to know about that project	India is going to launch a satellite which will be orbiting around the Moon. This will be launched in September/October 2008. It will also deliver a small payload for positioning on the Moon for carrying out geological study of a Moon surface.
Agriculture is the backbone of Indian economy. Despite this why this sector is underestimated?	No. The sector needs lot of support. Our agricultural scientists and researchers are working with the farmers to enhance the productivity in different regions. This has ofcourse to increase in the national scale.
Being from a poor family background how did you manage your financial & educational life so well? Share your experience with us.	My teacher talked to my parents and motivated me to study
What did you enjoy most - being a whole time scientist or being the President of India?	Any task has got its own challenges. We have to like the job in which we are involved, then only we will succeed in life.
What according to you is the most revolutionary scientific discovery?	Electricity. Electricity has played a great role in every aspect of our life.
How can our country create more Nobel Laureates?	1. Scientific magnanimity, 2. Science should be a life time mission, 3. Research challenges 4. Vision for the nation
Our Amity is offering B. Tech. in Aerospace Engineering, B.Tech Dual Degree in Avionics & Aeronautics and B.Tech in Nuclear Science & Engineering. Which B.Tech has the biggest scope in the future?	Certainly these courses are having a big potential in the respective areas in the country. But, in future anything do it with Renewable energy, replacement for fossil fuel, safe drinking water, healthcare for the chronic diseases- will have a big market potential
Our Project ?VASUDHA? has brought us very close to the environment. What according to you is the best way in which we the students can bring sustainability to the environment?	1. Plant trees in your school or home or neighborhood 2. Keep your home, neighborhood clean 3. Conserve energy in your home 4. Minimize the use of fossil fuel 5. Work towards using solar energy 6. Create a transparent home
Is culture a barrier for our country?	India is a democratic nation of billion people, with multi-culture, multi-religion and multi-language. More than 60 years we have succeeded as a great democratic nation. Multi-culture definitely enhances the quality of the nation. Economic prosperity coupled with the citizens with value system is the ultimate goal of our national prosperity.
Are we on the right path to make India 2020 a developed nation? What do you feel about it?	Nation has got required material, required resource and required knowledge. To achieve India 2020, we need two important qualities. 1. I can do it spirit among every youth 2. Work with integrity and succeed with integrity.
Why do you love children ? they are happy always or do you wish to be like them?	Children have a dream in life. Children are unbiased. Always, they ask questions. They are also want to be creative. These aspects, I love among the children.
In everyoneñs life, there would be failures, what do you think about failures? How does one overcome them?	My experience is: Many times if you work hard with sufficient knowledge many successes come and also few times failures. Failures one has to analyze and find out the reason and then correct it for future programmes.
You have worked in a lot of projects. In which project did you worry a lot?	Every project has got certain complexity and connected problems. At no time, I allow the problem to become my captain. Worry shouldn?t become your captain. I become the captain of the problem, defeat the problem and succeed.
What is the difference between dream and planning?	Dream has to result into an aim and goal in life. That goal in life leads to acquiring the knowledge, hard work and perseverance to achieve what you have aimed. The second part needs planning. Planning is the mechanism which enables us to put our efforts in realizing the visualization.
Students who are good in scientific and other fields, are willing to go into research and do not wish to become teachers. If this continues, how can talents of students develop in future?	Good teaching comes out of good research. Combination of research and teaching is always very essential. Research should be the focus for the teacher while teaching. Nationally both government sector and private sector, teaching has to become the unique and respectable profession. Teacher, Society and School should be an integrated system. State and Central government should prioritize and facilitate this process. I visualize an integrated society of school, family and teaching. Technology should assist the teaching and the students should adopt technology. Teacher should assist students in the learning process and facilitate the students to mine the knowledge on their won in a manner which enriches the knowledge.
I heard 20% of scientists working in NASA are Indians. So they are helping America to become a developed country. But when our own country is struggling to launch a satellite to Mars, why is that scientists are willing to help America?	Indian scientists are working in different countries. Science is Borderless. Wherever scientific discovery takes place it transforms into technology and helps many nations. There are about 23 million Indian?s are abroad in various nations. By nature, Indian?s cross oceans for knowledge and wealth generations.
Sir, you always say that we must dream big and follow our dreams. What makes one follow one’s own dreams? Parents, access or commitment?	Dreams are finally nothing but goals or mission in life. In my case I had great teachers in various phases of life. And also my parents, my father and mother were very useful teachers to me throughout their lives. I was the only fellow in the family studying, and their commitment to me was absolute. The spiritual environment at home shaped me.
Sir, what is more important, the ability to handle failure or the ability to respond to failures?	Of course, I have myself gone through many successes and a few failures. And I have also met a number of successful people throughout the world wherever I have gone, and when I discuss with them, they reveal how many problems they have encountered, what kind of failures they have had.
And the nation’s expectations were on you?	A lot of expectation. So then Prof.Satish Dhawan, the chairman saw my hesitation. He called me and gave me some advice, famous advice. He said, “Kalam, if you don’t do any work, you don’t experience any problem.” Even in media, if you don’t report there is no problem. If you report, problem starts.
Sir, why do we find 2/3 of India’s engineering graduates unemployable? What do you think is the underlying problem?	During my recent visit to CanadaI visited a university called Waterloo. For an engineering degree students are taught in the classroom for one year, the next year they go to the industry. So two out of four years they spend in the industry. And in the industry they learn to work within the system, it may be the software system or the hardware system, machine system, electronic system, or chemical system. But they learn to apply what they studied at the university. So when they graduate there is good demand for them. They can hit the ground running.
So, it is lack of integration between real-life work and academia that is the problem?	I want to share with you my own experience. In 1957 I studied aeronautical engineering in Madras Institute of Technology. It was a difficult discipline to get into and we were only nine students. Now, Prof. Srinivasan gave us a six months project in our final year. The project was to design low-level (low altitude, he clarifies) attack fighter aircraft. So, having studied, aerodynamics, structures, propulsion, control, etc., here we have to put them together into a workable aircraft system design. I was the project leader for that. I was the ninth, so eight other people are there, someone would give propulsion, some other aerodynamics etc. So, after four and-a-half-months of study, I was there in my laboratory. The teacher, my guide comes. At that time we did not have computers, I was using the design board for drawing the design of the aircraft and my friends were all around me. So, he comes and sees and says, “I’m completely disappointed with your work; I am going to stop your scholarship if you don’t complete the design in two weeks time.” (Dr Kalam laughs.) It was a very costly education, if my scholarship stopped, I had to return home. I talked all kinds of things, gave him excuses, told him we had worked so hard, all of us are suffering etc. But to no avail. And so, finally all of us joined together day and night, Saturdays, Sundays; we didn’t even go to our hostels. And we designed the fighter aircraft.
Why, sir, is entrepreneurship and skill development very important to you?	We add seven million people every year at 10+2 level and three million graduates every year. So, we inject ten million people into the society every year as employment seekers. This is because entrepreneurship is not taught, either in the secondary school education or in higher education or university education. Entrepreneurship is not part of the curriculum, neither is acquisition of usable skills. That’s why I’m saying if 30 per cent people have to procure their skills, that training should be started during the period of education itself.
What is your reaction to your selection as NDA nominee for President?	I am overwhelmed by the gesture. Being the President of India is an onerous task.
Many say you are being made president because of your religion.	Really? To be honest I never thought of it that way at all. I have always regarded myself as an Indian.
What sort of a role would you like to play?	For any president the major task is thinking of the best way to integrate the nation. While speaking to 3,000 children in Porbandar recently a young girl asked me what my message was to them. I told her that our minds should be embedded with thoughts of the nation and that the nation is always bigger than the individual. I think that message is relevant here too.
Does being a scientist equip you in any way to perform your new duties?	No doubt, this will be a new type of mission. But essentially it is all about leadership and that is something we were trained for, even if the missions may have been different. We had a systems approach of careful analysis, design and integration that is relevant for any type of task. Also, we were not confined to conducting scientific research. We looked at the overall development of the nation.
But you have never handled the intricacies of politics.	My own definition of politics is that it is all about creating leaders to evolve policies that will take the country to higher levels. It is a multi-dimensional leadership that focuses on the nation's economic, social and political development. If you look at politics through this perspective then everything falls into place.
How do you view the current tensions between India and Pakistan?	I have not had time to study this thoroughly. All I would like to say at this moment is that India is a strong nation. That its strength doesn't come just from its weapons, but from its economic development and maturity in politics.
As president you would have to do things you never really enjoyed doing-like dressing formally and hosting formal dinners. Are you ready to change?	(Laughs) Let us say it will be a new experience. Besides, you can achieve a lot of work even while having dinner.
Dr. Kalam, you say the nation comes before the individual. What is your take on American business owners who have outsourced the jobs of their countrymen?	Every nation has to follow a certain policy: Commercial, trade, various other types of policies. The phenomenon of globalization is going on. If you consider the law of development, there are two types of nations. One category holds the developed nations, numbering less than 10, and the second category holds the hundreds of developing nations. Developed nations produce and market products in their own country and throughout the world. Only then can they survive as developed nations. Developing nations want to become developed nations. So, they have to produce products and competitively market them globally. So what is the commonality in the picture? Competitiveness! That is a key concept. Cost, quality, marketing — all make up factors of competitiveness. So, all nations have to work competitively, all nations have to depend on each other, work together. There’s nothing wrong in it.
How do you envision the epic communal divide between Muslims and Hindus bridged in India?	Let me tell you a story. The Europeans fought with each other for hundreds of years. They even created two world wars. But today, we see that these same 23 nations have created the European Union. There are rich, not so rich, and poor nations in the EU, and all of them are working towards making Europeans live prosperous, happy lives. So, in India also such changes will happen, in fact throughout the whole world — the earlier the better. To give another example, U.S.A#and U.S.S.R., during the Cold War, generated 10,000 nuclear warheads. Today they are friends. They are saying they are working for world peace, they say they will bring down the number of nuclear warheads. So, historically, this cycle has to come to India too. Good things will happe
You’ve been called the “Missile Man of India” and the “People’s President.” Is there an incongruity between your desire to empower the world with peace and making India a nuclear power?	I am innocent to the whole affair! I did not call myself these names! (laughs). When a nation is surrounded by weaponized nations, she has to equip herself. That’s what India has done. To make the nation peaceful and prosperous, we need minimum security. That’s what we have done.
What was your immediate reaction when “Agni” and “Prithvi” missiles were successful?	I was right there and witnessed the whole thing. Courage is key. My message, especially to young people is to have courage to think differently, courage to invent, to travel the unexplored path, courage to discover the impossible and to conquer the problems and succeed. These are great qualities that they must work towards. This is my message to the young people.
And who taught you this message?	Myself. I had to learn this myself. Literature also influenced me deeply. In India, we have a famous book called, Thirukkul, written 2,200 years back. I’ll quote a couplet: “If your thoughts are high, definitely you’re going to work for your aim, definitely you will succeed. But conversely, if you don’t have an aim, don’t have high thoughts, how can you aim at success?” My second favorite book is Light From Many Lamps, by (Lillian Eichler) Watson. And the third book that I love is Empire of the Mind. These three books have made my life.
