Q#Sir, We are happy about the new Brahamos you have invented. But why don?t you sir invent things which promotes peace?
A#First of all strength respects strength. To protect the nation, nation should have adequate strength. Hence we need to equip ourselves with minimum deterrent capability defence. If we have strength and good leadership, then peace in the nation will prevail.

Q#What are the job opportunities in Public and Private sector for us (Speech and Hearing Impaired Students)? 
A#3 % reservation is allotted for the differently abled persons including speech and hearing impaired students. Certainly now the number of private industries are encouraging and appointing the speech and hearing impaired students such as Sakthi masala in Tamilnadu. Many more industries will identify the right jobs and every one of the students who are having speech and hearing impaired students.

Q#Though India is continuing with corruption, hike in price and economic crisis, can it become a developed country within 2020 as you said? What are the steps to be taken by the youth towards that development?
A#As a youth of the nation, first and foremost your action is to study well. That is your first responsibility. Regarding corruption and other issues, the reform has to start from our home. If our home is corruption free, our village and city will be corruption free, then our state will be corruption free and the nation will be corruption free. Certainly our leaders should have the wisdom to bring down the price rise and manage the economic crisis.

Q#What is the biggest challenge facing India today and what should we do to contribute positively towards this challenge?
A#The youth needs to develop an attitude : I can do it! We can do it !! India will do it!!!

Q#what is the secret of success in your life?
A#Have an aim in life, acquire knowledge through all possible sources, work hard and never accept defeat by the problem, always defeat the problem and succeed.

Q#Commerce or science Stream? If we want to be a scientist in Isro, what are the procedures for it?
A#ISRO has an institute called Indian Institute Space Sciences and Technology (IIST) at Thiruvananthapuram. The admission into this institute is by a competitive examination for students who are appearing or completed class 12 examination on lines of JEE. The students graduating from IIST are offered scientific jobs at ISRO.

Q#How can we make developments in the field or science and at the same time make the process eco-friendly?
A#We have to be sensitive in every development about the damage it can cause to the environment and find scientific methods to mitigate these causes. This way we can find eco-friendly scientific applications.

Q#The recent tsunami and earthquake in Japan has cost major nuclear disaster. Will it have any impact on future nuclear development?
A#There will be impact. Thorium based nuclear reactors may replace the uranium based reactors. Also, the scientific community may look for other alternative renewable resources like solar, wind, and hydro.

Q#From your several achievements, which one do you feel most happy and proud of? What makes the student perfect?
A#The greatest satisfaction I had was, when we developed a FRO and fitted to polio affected children and they were happily dancing.

Q#How was your experience in the field of space technology?
A#It was very good. I could participate in developing the first space launch vehicle which has led to many launches and fulfillment of Prof. Vikram Sarabhai vision of the country?s ability to develop any type of satellite and launch it from Indian soil in different orbits.

Q#Who is the person who inspires you a lot?
A#Prof. Vikram Sarabhai

Q#What thoughts inspired you in your life to become successful?
A#My primary school teacher teaching, how the birds fly, inspired me to have a vision and aim in life.

Q#Granted that the invention of Chandrayana I and II the PSLV machine has reached to the tremendous heights and has been successful in discovering water on the moon. But what are the implications of such inventions on the common man who remains ignorant of them?
A#Any scientific mission has a societal relevance. Particularly all the Indian space missions have a societal relevance and contribution to the development of science and technologies. That will benefit the nation development. Whether it is Remote sensing, telecommunication, meteorology or Chandrayan to moon, it has the purpose of serving the humanity as a whole. Country?s development is not only measured how it provides good governance, but all around development including science and technology. India is trying to achieve excellence in all the fields including good governance, Space mission is one of the area where India is doing well.

Q#Your father insisted you to become an IAS but your choice was to become a pilot. Why you deviated from your father?s wish? Its not mentioned anywhere in your book also.
A#No. My father didn?t insist to become an IAS Officer. It is my teacher Sivasubramania Iyer who made me thing to fly. He gave me the wings to fly.

Q#According to NASSCOM only 30% of our engineering graduates are employable in industries. The industries are the maximum beneficiaries from the technical education. But still their contribution for this cause is not significant. Can Government insist on their adapting technical institutions
A#It is the responsibility of the institution to produce employable candidates with the necessary skills required for the industry. We need to have a adaptive syllabus to meet the industrial requirements. We need quality teachers, quality laboratories and quality content and good libraries. Certainly 11th plan projection will address these requirements.

Q#The project ?INCREDIBLE INDIA? was an enormous project which even brought us the envy of the first world countries. To which extent has this project been successful and as a student how can I contribute to this project?
A#Students can contribute for making the environment clean, neighbourhood clean and the city clean, state clean which will certainly make the tourism successful in India.

Q#Of now we are developing country and out 60% of populations are still depend on agriculture what you think for our country we should depend more industrialization or agriculture. What is that youth can do to help our country to go beyond the economy of USA & China
A#Agriculture is the core competence of India. Certainly India will witness 9 to 10% Agriculture growth rate. We have seen many success stories in India in doubling the food production and achieving 9% growth rate in agriculture. What we need to do is the value addition and agro food processing, while launching the second green revolution movement with system oriented approach towards farming, supporting organic and precision farming in a big way with micro irrigation, drip irrigation and provide quality seeds along with storage and distribution chain with market connectivity. If every youth thing that ?I can do it?, ?We can do it? and ?India can do it? and become an economically developed nation before 2020.

Q#Sir Could you please highlight the main drawbacks for Indian youth not liking basic science as their career, & what would be the best way to popularize the basic science.
A#Science is a life time mission. Hence India is taking steps to attract the scientific talent and thus created IISER in many regions. I have requested ISRO, DRDO, DAE, CSIR will come out innovative schemes to attract the students towards basic science and research

Q#Will technology replace teachers?
A#Technology can never replace teacher. A teacher can give value based education to a child, build ethical foundation, nurture creativity and give the child compassion and love. This cannot be replaced by the technology.

Q#The Science and Technology which is present in China is lacking in India. Why?
A#This is not true. First we should not compare with any country. Our scientific missions are according to the needs of the society and dynamic in nature.

Q#Sir, the present education system focuses mainly on theoretical knowledge and the main stress is on marks. So, isn?t innovation and true talent being backtracked? So can you suggest something regarding this?
A#Education system need to breed and bring the best of creativity from the students. Learning gives creativity, Creativity leads to thinking, Thinking provides knowledge, Knowledge makes you great. Let me share with you an experience of creating a framework for innovation in a nation. During my recent visit to Finland, I had an opportunity to meet the people from different walks of life in Finland, the political system, educationist, entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. When I met the Prime Minister of Finland, he talked to me about how they overcome the challenges of 1992 crisis situation using the three dimensional model namely having formulating the framework of synergetic education, research, entrepreneurship with venture capital. Finland political leaders, business leaders and academia joined together and decided to transform the nation through innovative education and knowledge products. In this context, Finland has made quality education is available to all citizens free of cost. Next they encourage innovation is primary focus of higher education and research. Risk taking is highly encouraged and appreciated and built the institutions that can primarily provide the venture capital for innovators and their ideas without any collateral security. With this innovation framework, ideas becoming patent, patents becoming technologies, technologies have become products and systems for the global market like Nokia. In India, the education system needs modifications to nurture ground level and practical creativity.

Q#India 2020 is a book that shows us everything you would hope for India. What was the inspiration behind it and what could have been the events that led to book being written.
A#India Vision 2020, was written with the inspiration to motivate different sections of the society and economy towards common national goals. The chief inspiration was to make India economically developed by 2020 through collective action.

Q#I am the student of 12th grade and as a student next year, will be a new phase of our education and we will face lot of challenges. What will be your advice to translate these challenges into opportunities?
A#Here, let me now recall famous verses of 13th century Persian Sufi poet Jalaluddin Rumi:Wings to Fly. You were born with potential.You were born with goodness and trust. You were born with ideas and dreams. You were born with greatness. You were born with wings. You are not meant for crawling, so donñt, you have wings. Learn to use them to fly. My message to you, young friends, is that education gives you wings to fly. Achievement comes out of fire in our sub-conscious mind that ?I will win?. So, each one of you assembled here and elsewhere, will have ?Wings of Fire?. The Wing of Fire will indeed lead to knowledge which will make you to fly as a doctor, or an engineer, or a scientist, or a teacher, or a political leader, or a bureaucrat or a diplomat or anything you want to be. You all students can do it.

Q#Space has always fascinated you and us. Is it possible for India to have a personal space station or can India be a part of the next ISS. If India can have a space station, by when do you think it will function and how do we go about it?
A#I am sure, one day India?s space mission will lead to the creation permanent space based centre. This can have a societal application by being a centre for advanced weather mapping, testing, and space solar power.

Q#We always read about the destructive power of lighting. I would like to know what will happen to the power of lighting when it hits the earth. Does it get washed away by rain water or will it get mixed up with natural resources like minerals etc. to form some other energy.
A#Lightning has indeed a lot of energy. It is believed that 16 million lightning storms every year. An average bolt of lightning can carry about 1 terawatt of power with current upto 300,000 amperes. When lightning strikes the earth, its energy is immediately dissipated in heat energy and light energy. However, lightning hits the earth for a very short span of time (30 micro seconds) and it is unpredictable. Hence, it is difficult to extract from lightning using current technology.

Q#Which is that one special lesson you have learnt as - A student? - A scientist? - The President of India?
A#As a student, this is important, have an aim in life and acquire all possible knowledge towards a goal. As a scientist, I learnt that problems will always be there, but with hard work and perseverance, they can be overcome. As a President, I learnt, that for India to be developed, it is paramount that integrated economic development of the 600,000 villages undertaken.

Q#What does the word failure mean to a scientist and what does it mean to a common mean?
A#When you do a difficult missions, there is always a risk of problem. Problems should not become your captain. You have to be the captain of the problem, defeat the problem and succeed. Here I would like to share an experience about managing failures.

Q#What are the systemic changes that are needed for India to get more institutions like the IITñs and IISc?
A#Govt is already is in this process. We have increased number of seats in each IIT, IIM and IISc. At the same time, new centres of excellence are being created across the nation.

Q#If you were chosen as the leader of world, what would you do to improve the present condition of the world?
A#Let me share with you my vision for the nation?s of the world by 2030. Distinctive profile for the Nations of the World in 2030 1.	A world of nations where the divide between rural and urban, rich and the poor, developed and developing has narrowed down. 2.	A world of nations where there is an equitable distribution and adequate access to energy and quality water. 3.	A world where core competencies of each nation are identified. Missions synergizing the core competencies of different nations lead to economic advantage and faster development for all the societies. 4.	A world of nations where all the students of all societies are imparted education with value system. 5.	A world of nations where affordable quality health care is available to all. 6.	A world of nations where the governance is responsive, transparent and corruption free. 7.	A world of nations where crimes against women and children are absent and none in the society feels alienated. 8.	A world in which every nation is able to give a clean green environment to all its citizens. 9.	A world that is prosperous, healthy, secure, devoid of terrorism, peaceful and happy and continues with a sustainable growth path. 10.	A world of nations with creative leadership who ensure effective mechanisms to resolve conflicts between nations and societies in a timely manner keeping overall peace and prosperity of the world as a goal.

Q#What key expectations you want from the students of todays? generation to advance in science and technology and make India a prosperous country?
A#The youth should make science as a mission and find how science and technology can alleviate the problems of the common man. The next generation of scientists have to be world class and their inventions and discoveries should address the global problems of better nutrition, better quality of water for all, disease free world, and climate change.

Q#Why do you like children?
A#Because they are vibrant, full of energy, innovative and keen learners. The ignited minds of the youth is most powerful resource on the earth, above the earth and under the earth.

Q#As a visionary what is your opinion regarding the enforcement of Right to Education Act?
A#Right to Education Bill Assent has been accorded for the 86th Constitution Amendment Act ? Right to Education Bill for children between the age group of 5 and 14 years. But an Act alone cannot achieve the goal unless the education is delivered in a manner, which will take into account the socio-economic reality, and perception of people to whom it is addressed. Apart from attracting children to schools, the education system should be able to provide nourishment and inject creativity among the children. Also the aim of the education system should be to build character, human values enhance the learning capacity through technology and build the confidence among children to face the future.

Q#As students how can we contribute to fulfill your dreams of making India a developed country by 2020?
A#Have an aim in life, acquire knowledge, work hard and persevere.

Q#As a boy what ambition you had and how did you work towards the goal? Please state some instances or incidents that you went through that can motivate us in achieving the goal to become successful in life?
A#My primary school teacher Sri Sivasubramania Iyer inspired me through one of his science class. While he was teaching, the way he taught how the birds fly, that incident made me to think of flying high in life. That led to my career prospects and made me to work hard to achieve the goal. Dreams are very important because they will wake you up from sleep and will lead to constant thinking for realizing the dream. Thinking leads to action.

Q#Sir, you said India will be a Developed Nation by 2020 in 2000. Even after 10 years we still have not shown much progress. Do you still think India will be able to realize the dream by 2020?
A#This is not true. India has made significant progress in many areas and the economy has grown at an average of about 7 to 8% in the last decade. Of course moving ahead in the next ten years, we need innovative ways to achieve development and integrated mission for rural area. This collective action will lead to economically developed nation by 2020.

Q#What do you think Humanity lacks?
A#We have to evolve a society that will respect differences and celebrate differences. What are the various issues on tolerance? 1.	Tolerance for people?s opinion 2.Tolerance for people?s culture 3.Tolerance for people?s belief system 4.and Tolerance for people?s styles

Q#Sir. How to control the black money invested in the foreign banks for safeguarding our national economy?
A#Our governance system needs a change and we have to build the system on trust and implant effective mechanism to detect the wrong doings rather than stifling the growth of the spirit of entrepreneurship of every citizen with rules and regulations that have many loop holes for the known to get evaded.

Q#Sir. You are always interested to converse with the children. Why?
A#Children minds are less biased. I am trying to imbibe the spirit ?I can do it?, ?Courage? and ?Righteousness? among them. So that nation will get the enlightened citizens in the future.

Q#Sir. In spite of high security in our country, the terrorists are attacking the country. How can we control the terrorism?
A#Wherever people participation in eliminating the terrorism, there you can find terrorism will find it difficult to penetrate. Hence it is essential to increase the awareness among the public and that will help the government agencies in sensing the activities which leads to terrorism.

Q#Sir. In the present scenario, all educated people are interested in software field only. What is its impact on other areas particularly Basic Sciences and its Research fields?
A#Certainly there is an attraction towards a field which gives employment and wealth. That is nothing wrong. IT Knowledge has brought prosperity to many. Slowly the situation will change. But what will give the long term growth, that is to invest our knowledge and resource in the field of core competence that we posses in the nation and create knowledge wealth (Intellectual Property) that will bring overall sustained growth to the country and to all.

Q#Sir. I want to be like you. What are your ways of attaining this level?
A#1.Aim in life 2.Acquire knowledge continuously 3.Sweat, Sweat and Sweat 4.Perseverance: Defeat the problem and succeed

Q#Sir. After so many years of working in research field, which sort of research did you find more innovative?
A#Any research which will bring peace and smile to the 6 billion people of the world. Adequate access to safe drinking water to 6 billion people, Energy generation through renewable sources, solution to the diseases and its prevention with quality healthcare for all, quality education for all and above all peace and prosperity without social imbalances are the prime target for any kind of research.

Q#Sir. If religions are root cause for all kinds of blood shed and turmoil in the world. How the same religions can be made fit into the present scenario of world to make man?s life quite comfortable and peaceful?
A#If the religions are not there, world would have become nonexistent now. It is not the religion; it is the question of fusion of dogmatism and fundamentalism that erupts into violence and hatred in the minds of the people. When we unite the people with spiritualism in the form of love and affection, certainly the differences will vanish and hatred in the minds will disappear.

Q#Sir. How is zero gravity maintained on earth's surface in laboratory Where astronauts get trained before being going to space?
A#The space conditions are created in the vacuum chamber created for that purpose and the astronauts are trained in that vacuum chamber, were the Zero Gravity is maintained.

Q#Sir. As we know that Hiroshima and Nagasaki are still suffering from the cause of radiation which was emitted by nuclear explosion. Why the scientists did not take any measure to control it?
A#Adequate measures are taken to prevent to the maximum extend

Q#Sir. Once you had said that by 2020, India will be a developed country. At present rate, do you think we can surpass China?
A#We don't have to compare any nation. We are a democratic country, we have certain ups and downs and answerable to parliament. Certainly we are slow, but steady in achieving our mission.

Q#Sir. You are inspiring millions across the globe. Who inspires you?
A#I was inspired by my teacher ?Siva Subramania Iyer?

Q#Sir. You being an Ambassador for peace and harmony, how do you feel when you are called as ?Missile Man??
A#That is one Avatar, I worked with my team to strengthen the defence of the nation. Now I am working for world peace through developmental missions.

Q#Sir, Mahatma Gandhiji, Lord Buddha, Lord Mahavira and like have stressed on ? Non-violence and peace?. Then, is there any need of doing huge investments on nuclear weapons in the name of defence?
A#Strength respect strength. Out of 5000 years of Indian history, we have been ruled by foreign powers except 600 years. When many nations carry nuclear weapons in its stock, we cannot do tapas. Hence strength respect strength.

Q#Sir. In the present day context, the brain drain looks to be a lucrative preposition for our nation. What is your opinion?
A#Brain drain is not a problem in india. Nothing wrong when 20 million people out of 1.2 billion goes abroad and work in various capacities to earn knowledge and wealth. Certainly umbilical connectivity with the mother nation will bring knowledge back to the nation.

Q#Sir. Will India become a superpower country in the coming future?
A#India will become an economically developed nation before the year 2020.

Q#Sir. As a citizen of the country and as a student, what are my responsibilities towards a corruption-free country?
A#Bhavani Story of Adi Chunchunagari

Q#Sir. Can matter exist inside the black hole?
A#Scientists believe that may be even the existence of universe is possible within the black hole. Using an adaptation of Einstein?s general theory of relativity, Nikodem Poplawski, of Indiana University, Bloomington, analysed the theoretical motion of particles entering a black hole. He concluded that it was possible for a whole new universe to exist inside every black hole, which could mean that our own universe could be inside a black hole as well. According to Nikodem Poplawski Maybe the huge black holes at the centre of the Milky Way and other galaxies are bridges to different universes.

Q#Sir. With respect to ?Vision 2020?, in your opinion how much we have achieved till present?
A#We have to only 10 years to go. We have been progressing in service sector and industrial sector with more than 10% growth rate except on agriculture it is only 2% growth rate. We need to focus our energy towards achieving 10% GDP growth and maintain it for a next one decade. There is a good hope that we will achieve it.

Q#Sir, The recent global survey on quality education says that our reputed national institutes are not qualified to compete in top 100 institutes of the world. By what measures our institutes can excel by imparting the world class education?
A#We need to reorient our higher education system towards research ? teaching ? research. Bring autonomy to the educational institutions in framing the syllabus according to the national priority and demand. Vice chancellors has to be selected based on academic and management performance and merit.

Q#Will India be a Global Power by 2020?
A#Definitely. India has all the resources, particularly youth resources of more than 500 million people, it's a great resource in a democracy. Youth needs to have confidence; I can do it, that will result into we can do it and Nation will do it.

Q#What is the difference between a Rocket Launcher and Missile Launcher?
A#Rockets mostly put the satellite in polar orbit for societal application. Missiles deliver the bombs to targets. This is for Defence needs

Q#Are UFO's and Aliens real? During the tenure of your service have you ever come across any of them?
A#I don't believe in UFO. Of course we are not alone. There are 100 billion galaxy in the universe. Each galaxy will have 100 billion stars and each star may have many planets like earth. Hence, there is a possibility a living beings of various degree of intelligence at least thousands of planets. 

Q#What is your magical formula to be successful in life?
A#There is no magic. Hard work, hard work and hard work. I suggest four aspects for good performance: Aim in life, acquire knowledge, work hard and perseverance.

Q#Sir, when will India reach its epitome in space research? Is the progress satisfactory? If no, where are we lagging?
A#We are not in competition with anyone in space research. All our programmes of space research are directed towards societal missions leading to upgradation of quality of life of people. Major effort is on providing communication, resource mapping and meteorology. These areas, we have achieved the vision of Prof. Sarabhai. Now we are going on to Lunar mission and interplanetary exploration.

Q#How interest in science can be promoted among the students?
A#You should read the life history of noble laureates and find out how they succeeded in their mission when they were young like you and know the details about their discoveries, the troubles they encountered and how they solved. Students must be told about the challenges in science. They should know the value of science. They should become aware of scientific magnanimity and science is a life time mission. These actions will attract the youth to science.

Q#Sir, alcoholism is one of the major problems facing our country. A lot has been done to make people aware about it. But how can we solve this problem, when liquor is easily available everywhere?
A#Recently, I went to the Lead India Camp at Karimnagar and Medak districts of Andhra Pradesh. Based on my ten point oath, the children have gone to the village to wean away people from the habit of drinking. Three boys and girls came to me and told, how they weaned away their father from the habit of drinking. If children can persuade their parents not to indulge in such activities, there will be no alcoholism in the country, because they have the tool of love.

Q#Sir, why do you love children?
A#Children they dream. The ignited mind of the youth is the most powerful resource on the earth, under the earth and above the earth. Todayñs children are the hope for the future. Nurturing them is always my priority.

Q#The book that has impressed you the most? Why? How can we change the current education scenario?
A#Light from many Lamps by Lillian Eichler Watson which has inspired me on many occasions when I was slightly down. The education scenario is constantly changing. There is a concerted effect for injecting creativity among the children studying in the primary school. This will lead to a big change both in secondary education and higher education.

Q#What is your experience about India in the field of Scientific Development? What is your present area of research?
A#So far India has been concentrating on technology development. Time has now come for India to get into basic research, so that we can develop technologies using our basic research results. This is essential for making India to upgrade itself in the global competitiveness index. This action has already commenced. My present research areas include: (a) finding a solution for cure of mentally retarded and autistic children (b) development of PURA (Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) and (c) application of ICT for remote education and healthcare delivery.

Q#an students play an active role in Politics? What is your opinion about Childrenñs parliament?
A#As long as they are studying, they should concentrate on their studies and excel. Student should not have time to participate in politics. But after the studentñs life, any interest in politics, they can specialize in the field and enter into. Regarding childrenñs parliament, normally through children parliament, students learn, how our nation is ruled through the Parliamentary decision making process and provides correction for the mistakes and errors in governance. There is nothing wrong in it.

Q#The Society is in the grip of violence. How can the youth play a positive role in its eradication?
A#I am sure, dear friends you will acquire the following traits: 1. tolerance for people's opinion 2. tolerance for peopleñs culture 3. tolerance for people's belief system 4. and tolerance for peopleñs styles. That means a mature society with enlightened individuals will celebrate the differences of various cultures and live in harmony.

Q#How do you think that we can empower women?
A#Education, Education and Education of women. All of you should go to the neighbouring villages during holidays and vacation and teach at-least five persons who cannot read and write without affecting your own education.

Q#What will be your advice for the students in India?
A#They must excel in studies. They should have a clear aim. They should acquire knowledge to reach the aim. Work hard and persevere.

Q#India is planning to launch Space shuttle to moon in 2010. We want to know about that project
A#India is going to launch a satellite which will be orbiting around the Moon. This will be launched in September/October 2008. It will also deliver a small payload for positioning on the Moon for carrying out geological study of a Moon surface.

Q#Agriculture is the backbone of Indian economy. Despite this why this sector is underestimated?
A#No. The sector needs lot of support. Our agricultural scientists and researchers are working with the farmers to enhance the productivity in different regions. This has ofcourse to increase in the national scale.

Q#Being from a poor family background how did you manage your financial & educational life so well? Share your experience with us.
A#My teacher talked to my parents and motivated me to study

Q#What did you enjoy most - being a whole time scientist or being the President of India?
A#Any task has got its own challenges. We have to like the job in which we are involved, then only we will succeed in life.

Q#What according to you is the most revolutionary scientific discovery?
A#Electricity. Electricity has played a great role in every aspect of our life.

Q#How can our country create more Nobel Laureates?
A#1. Scientific magnanimity, 2. Science should be a life time mission, 3. Research challenges 4. Vision for the nation

Q#Our Amity is offering B. Tech. in Aerospace Engineering, B.Tech Dual Degree in Avionics & Aeronautics and B.Tech in Nuclear Science & Engineering. Which B.Tech has the biggest scope in the future?
A#Certainly these courses are having a big potential in the respective areas in the country. But, in future anything do it with Renewable energy, replacement for fossil fuel, safe drinking water, healthcare for the chronic diseases- will have a big market potential

Q#Our Project ?VASUDHA? has brought us very close to the environment. What according to you is the best way in which we the students can bring sustainability to the environment?
A#1. Plant trees in your school or home or neighborhood 2. Keep your home, neighborhood clean 3. Conserve energy in your home 4. Minimize the use of fossil fuel 5. Work towards using solar energy 6. Create a transparent home

Q#Is culture a barrier for our country?
A#India is a democratic nation of billion people, with multi-culture, multi-religion and multi-language. More than 60 years we have succeeded as a great democratic nation. Multi-culture definitely enhances the quality of the nation. Economic prosperity coupled with the citizens with value system is the ultimate goal of our national prosperity.

Q#Are we on the right path to make India 2020 a developed nation? What do you feel about it?
A#Nation has got required material, required resource and required knowledge. To achieve India 2020, we need two important qualities. 1. I can do it spirit among every youth 2. Work with integrity and succeed with integrity.

Q#Why do you love children ? they are happy always or do you wish to be like them?
A#Children have a dream in life. Children are unbiased. Always, they ask questions. They are also want to be creative. These aspects, I love among the children.

Q#In everyoneñs life, there would be failures, what do you think about failures? How does one overcome them?
A#My experience is: Many times if you work hard with sufficient knowledge many successes come and also few times failures. Failures one has to analyze and find out the reason and then correct it for future programmes.

Q#You have worked in a lot of projects. In which project did you worry a lot?
A#Every project has got certain complexity and connected problems. At no time, I allow the problem to become my captain. Worry shouldn?t become your captain. I become the captain of the problem, defeat the problem and succeed.

Q#What is the difference between dream and planning?
A#Dream has to result into an aim and goal in life. That goal in life leads to acquiring the knowledge, hard work and perseverance to achieve what you have aimed. The second part needs planning. Planning is the mechanism which enables us to put our efforts in realizing the visualization.

Q#Students who are good in scientific and other fields, are willing to go into research and do not wish to become teachers. If this continues, how can talents of students develop in future?
A#Good teaching comes out of good research. Combination of research and teaching is always very essential. Research should be the focus for the teacher while teaching. Nationally both government sector and private sector, teaching has to become the unique and respectable profession. Teacher, Society and School should be an integrated system. State and Central government should prioritize and facilitate this process. I visualize an integrated society of school, family and teaching. Technology should assist the teaching and the students should adopt technology. Teacher should assist students in the learning process and facilitate the students to mine the knowledge on their won in a manner which enriches the knowledge.

Q#I heard 20% of scientists working in NASA are Indians. So they are helping America to become a developed country. But when our own country is struggling to launch a satellite to Mars, why is that scientists are willing to help America?
A#Indian scientists are working in different countries. Science is Borderless. Wherever scientific discovery takes place it transforms into technology and helps many nations. There are about 23 million Indian?s are abroad in various nations. By nature, Indian?s cross oceans for knowledge and wealth generations.

Q#Sir, you always say that we must dream big and follow our dreams. What makes one follow one’s own dreams? Parents, access or commitment?
A#Dreams are finally nothing but goals or mission in life. In my case I had great teachers in various phases of life. And also my parents, my father and mother were very useful teachers to me throughout their lives. I was the only fellow in the family studying, and their commitment to me was absolute. The spiritual environment at home shaped me.

Q#Sir, what is more important, the ability to handle failure or the ability to respond to failures?
A#Of course, I have myself gone through many successes and a few failures. And I have also met a number of successful people throughout the world wherever I have gone, and when I discuss with them, they reveal how many problems they have encountered, what kind of failures they have had.

Q#And the nation’s expectations were on you?
A#A lot of expectation. So then Prof.Satish Dhawan, the chairman saw my hesitation. He called me and gave me some advice, famous advice. He said, “Kalam, if you don’t do any work, you don’t experience any problem.” Even in media, if you don’t report there is no problem. If you report, problem starts.

Q#Sir, why do we find 2/3 of India’s engineering graduates unemployable? What do you think is the underlying problem?
A#During my recent visit to CanadaI visited a university called Waterloo. For an engineering degree students are taught in the classroom for one year, the next year they go to the industry. So two out of four years they spend in the industry. And in the industry they learn to work within the system, it may be the software system or the hardware system, machine system, electronic system, or chemical system. But they learn to apply what they studied at the university. So when they graduate there is good demand for them. They can hit the ground running.

Q#So, it is lack of integration between real-life work and academia that is the problem?
A#I want to share with you my own experience. In 1957 I studied aeronautical engineering in Madras Institute of Technology. It was a difficult discipline to get into and we were only nine students. Now, Prof. Srinivasan gave us a six months project in our final year. The project was to design low-level (low altitude, he clarifies) attack fighter aircraft. So, having studied, aerodynamics, structures, propulsion, control, etc., here we have to put them together into a workable aircraft system design. I was the project leader for that. I was the ninth, so eight other people are there, someone would give propulsion, some other aerodynamics etc. So, after four and-a-half-months of study, I was there in my laboratory. The teacher, my guide comes. At that time we did not have computers, I was using the design board for drawing the design of the aircraft and my friends were all around me. So, he comes and sees and says, “I’m completely disappointed with your work; I am going to stop your scholarship if you don’t complete the design in two weeks time.” (Dr Kalam laughs.) It was a very costly education, if my scholarship stopped, I had to return home. I talked all kinds of things, gave him excuses, told him we had worked so hard, all of us are suffering etc. But to no avail. And so, finally all of us joined together day and night, Saturdays, Sundays; we didn’t even go to our hostels. And we designed the fighter aircraft.

Q#Why, sir, is entrepreneurship and skill development very important to you?
A#We add seven million people every year at 10+2 level and three million graduates every year. So, we inject ten million people into the society every year as employment seekers. This is because entrepreneurship is not taught, either in the secondary school education or in higher education or university education. Entrepreneurship is not part of the curriculum, neither is acquisition of usable skills. That’s why I’m saying if 30 per cent people have to procure their skills, that training should be started during the period of education itself.

Q#What is your reaction to your selection as NDA nominee for President?
A#I am overwhelmed by the gesture. Being the President of India is an onerous task.

Q#Many say you are being made president because of your religion.
A#Really? To be honest I never thought of it that way at all. I have always regarded myself as an Indian.

Q#What sort of a role would you like to play?
A#For any president the major task is thinking of the best way to integrate the nation. While speaking to 3,000 children in Porbandar recently a young girl asked me what my message was to them. I told her that our minds should be embedded with thoughts of the nation and that the nation is always bigger than the individual. I think that message is relevant here too.

Q#Does being a scientist equip you in any way to perform your new duties?
A#No doubt, this will be a new type of mission. But essentially it is all about leadership and that is something we were trained for, even if the missions may have been different. We had a systems approach of careful analysis, design and integration that is relevant for any type of task. Also, we were not confined to conducting scientific research. We looked at the overall development of the nation.

Q#But you have never handled the intricacies of politics.
A#My own definition of politics is that it is all about creating leaders to evolve policies that will take the country to higher levels. It is a multi-dimensional leadership that focuses on the nation's economic, social and political development. If you look at politics through this perspective then everything falls into place.

Q#How do you view the current tensions between India and Pakistan?
A#I have not had time to study this thoroughly. All I would like to say at this moment is that India is a strong nation. That its strength doesn't come just from its weapons, but from its economic development and maturity in politics.

Q#As president you would have to do things you never really enjoyed doing-like dressing formally and hosting formal dinners. Are you ready to change?
A#(Laughs) Let us say it will be a new experience. Besides, you can achieve a lot of work even while having dinner.

Q#Dr. Kalam, you say the nation comes before the individual. What is your take on American business owners who have outsourced the jobs of their countrymen?
A#Every nation has to follow a certain policy: Commercial, trade, various other types of policies. The phenomenon of globalization is going on. If you consider the law of development, there are two types of nations. One category holds the developed nations, numbering less than 10, and the second category holds the hundreds of developing nations. Developed nations produce and market products in their own country and throughout the world. Only then can they survive as developed nations. Developing nations want to become developed nations. So, they have to produce products and competitively market them globally. So what is the commonality in the picture? Competitiveness! That is a key concept. Cost, quality, marketing — all make up factors of competitiveness. So, all nations have to work competitively, all nations have to depend on each other, work together. There’s nothing wrong in it.

Q#How do you envision the epic communal divide between Muslims and Hindus bridged in India?
A#Let me tell you a story. The Europeans fought with each other for hundreds of years. They even created two world wars. But today, we see that these same 23 nations have created the European Union. There are rich, not so rich, and poor nations in the EU, and all of them are working towards making Europeans live prosperous, happy lives. So, in India also such changes will happen, in fact throughout the whole world — the earlier the better. To give another example, U.S.A#and U.S.S.R., during the Cold War, generated 10,000 nuclear warheads. Today they are friends. They are saying they are working for world peace, they say they will bring down the number of nuclear warheads. So, historically, this cycle has to come to India too. Good things will happe

Q#You’ve been called the “Missile Man of India” and the “People’s President.” Is there an incongruity between your desire to empower the world with peace and making India a nuclear power?
A#I am innocent to the whole affair! I did not call myself these names! (laughs). When a nation is surrounded by weaponized nations, she has to equip herself. That’s what India has done. To make the nation peaceful and prosperous, we need minimum security. That’s what we have done.

Q#What was your immediate reaction when “Agni” and “Prithvi” missiles were successful?
A#I was right there and witnessed the whole thing. Courage is key. My message, especially to young people is to have courage to think differently, courage to invent, to travel the unexplored path, courage to discover the impossible and to conquer the problems and succeed. These are great qualities that they must work towards. This is my message to the young people.

Q#And who taught you this message?
A#Myself. I had to learn this myself. Literature also influenced me deeply. In India, we have a famous book called, Thirukkul, written 2,200 years back. I’ll quote a couplet: “If your thoughts are high, definitely you’re going to work for your aim, definitely you will succeed. But conversely, if you don’t have an aim, don’t have high thoughts, how can you aim at success?” My second favorite book is Light From Many Lamps, by (Lillian Eichler) Watson. And the third book that I love is Empire of the Mind. These three books have made my life.

Q#How did you feel when you realized that you didn’t have to support your family with your newspaper route anymore?
President Abdul Kalam shares a joke with anti apartheid icon Nelson Mandela during a visit to Johannesburg in 2004. 
A#I was the youngest member of my family, a student when World War II broke out. We were under the British rule at that time and the country was going through some tough times. But after the war ended, I didn’t have to sell newspapers anymore and life returned to normal again.

Q#How come you’re such a transparently sincere person?
A#See, I firmly believe that the nation has to be bigger than the individual and the individual has to work for the nation. If you’re working for yourself, you’ll not be transparent. But once you put the nation above you, you become transparent.

Q#Sir, on August 15, 1947, you were only 16 years old. Where were you on that particular day? How did people react in the streets? How did they celebrate the sudden freedom of India from the centuries old bondage of British rule?
A#Well, it’s a beautiful question. I was born in the small island town of Rameshwaram where I completed my primary school education in the Panchayat school. I went to a slightly bigger town 40 minutes away from Rameshwaram, for my high school studies. At that time only the great event took place for the nation. My teacher, Reverend Teri Solomon, told all of our class boys that they must attend the midnight celebration on 15th August 1947, in the quadrangle of the school.

Q#Mr. President, Dr. Rajendra Prasad was sworn in as the first President of India on January 26, 1950. Did you ever think then or later that you could someday become the President of India? Please share with our viewers your rise to the highest office in the nation; how did this all come about?
A#“Well, that dream was not there, not at all. My younger age dream was to fly, as inspired by my primary school teacher, Subramaniam Iyer. One day, he taught us how a bird flies. The way he taught us how a bird flies led me to want something to do with flight. Of course, he injected in me an ambition that I must fly in life. After my aeronautical degree, it was a disappointment that I was not selected by the Air Force. But then, I was fortunate that the space program got started by the visionary Dr. Vikram Sarabai then, and I was entrusted with the project for the design and development of the first satellite launch vehicle for the country.

Q#Why the students have to face partiality in the schools?
A#That is a part of growing up.

Q#How can we stop the black hole from further deepening in Antarctica?
A#You mean the Ozone Hole. We can attempt to reduce the Ozone Hole by reducing the emissions of chlorofluorocarbons into the atmosphere.

Q#When we know that space is infinite what is the use of exploring space?
A#We explore space in the spirit of inquiry to expand our knowlede.

Q#In case of nuclear energy reactors, energy is definitely released in a greats amount but on the other hand it is deteriorating the ecological balance as it is causing a lot of pollution. So why not we concentrate more on the renewable resources and invent such techniques and instruments so that we can make the best possible use of these resources.
A#Research and development is going on into renewable resources. However nuclear energy technology has improved over the years and it is no longer as dangerous as it was thought to be many years ago.

Q#After the successful mission of India's first space capsule, SRE-I, how much time will it take for India to develop space shuttles like NASA.
A#We are doing very well in space technology and are capable of the most things. ISRO is doing a good job and we can do almost anything that other space going countries are capable of doing, including re-usable spacecraft.

Q#How economically viable, a manned mission to Moon would be for a developing country like India? Apart from putting India on the international space map, what other benefits can India derive from India?
A#Space science has a lot of spin offs which benefit a society. The Moon has helium 3 which is a future source of energy. These are the benefits.

Q#A scientist and then converted to President. Do you think can bring a new era in a country like India? If yes, then how?
A#I am working for a developed India and smiles on the faces of a billion people.

Q#Do we really need to view everything from a scientific side for proper understanding?
A#Yes. Science is the only way man can progress fast.

Q#There are many shortcomings of science, which has compelled people to think:
Is science a boon or bane?
Is it a blessing or a curse?
So, what are the ways to reduce these shortcomings?
A#Science is innocent. It is certainly not a bane. It is how it used by man that makes it a blessing or a curse. For example nuclear energy can be used for generation of electricity or also for making bombs.

Q#Where do you see India 20 years from now in the field of science and technology?
A#Youth is the greatest resource on the Earth, under the Earth and above the Earth. This is a tremendous resource for the Nation. Our youth will help is in becoming very accomplished in science and technology.

Q#When can India think of sending a man to the Moon in its own rocket?
A#ISRO is already working on this and by the next few years this will be possible.

Q#What is the future of space science in India after the development of the cryogenic stage in rockets?
A#India is developing re-entry technology so that it can progress to putting an astronaut into space and returning him/her back to Earth safely. In 2008, the Chandrayan Space Craft will orbit the Moon and land a payload there for scientific experiments.

Q#There are various satellites revolving around the Earth. Recently, China destroyed its old satellite and its debris may cause to other satellites. Don't you think that there must be an international union to discuss such destruction as this can trigger a change reaction?
A#Warfare in space should not be encouraged as space belongs to everyone.

Q#What is your outlook on the superstitions and religious beliefs in India over the advancing pace of science and technology?
A#As education spreads and prosperity increases, people will appreciate the importance of having scientific thinking. As a result, superstitions will slowly become less. Religious beliefs in the form of spiritualism are not bad.

Q#Upto what extent has science and technology been able to spread awareness in the remote villages of India. Jawahar Lal Nehru said India will progress if its villages will progress?
A#There is good scope to increase awareness about various things in rural areas, which can help in development. Science and technology is providing the means of spreading this awareness.

Q#We have so many meetings in all fields. Why are we not making anti corruption meeting. It is the only issue, making India is a developing country for so many years. But I want to see India as a developed country. Please conduct conferences on corruption. Then rural people can know what suffering is.
A#Know law or conferences can end corruption. Righteousness and enlightened citizenship can end this problem. Our children have the weapon of love, to convince those in their families who are corrupt especially corrupt mother and father to change their ways. The youth must take this up as a mission.

Q#As we all know the Brahmos Missile which is made by the help of Russia and India. How would it help in self-defence?
A#The Brahmos Missile is the product of joint collaboration between India and Russia, where the core competences of the two nations were brought together for a worldclass product. It is a supersonic cruise missile which can be launched from multiple platforms and therefore can be of use in the nation's defence.

Q#What do we mean by space stations and space labs?
A#Space stations are orbiting structures in space, which Orbit the earth at a certain altitude. Space labs are laboratories in space aboard the space stations or space vehicle in which experiments in zero gravity are conducted.

Q#In our education system today, students are going towards theoretical things instead of practical thought. As a student and Scientists, how did you tackle it and overcome this thought?
A#Luckily I had a good teacher in Class V in Rameshwaram. His name was Siva Subramanya Iyer. He took care to also show us the theory in action, therefore, practical examples.

Q#You are the champion in nuclear physics. I want to ask you why are we making missiles, which have more harm than benefit. India is a great country, which has a great and powerful army. So far defensive purpose we can use the power of our army. Is the purpose to make missiles only to increase the grace of India in the world?
A#With our neighbourhood having nuclear weapons, we cannot sit in Tapas.

Q#What role can we play towards progress and prosperity of the country?
A#As students, you must study hard and excel in your work for good future. Also, you can do two other things. Plant five saplings in your neighbourhood, go to the surrounding villages if you are living in a city and teach five people how to read and write in your spare time.

Q#How can Science help in helping the betterment of human life?
A#Science can translate research into applications thus bringing costs down of things, which can be of practical use for the common person, especially those in rural areas.

Q#Why are we forgiving Pakistan, as they sent terrorists to India?
A#We want an environment of external peace so that our economic development is fast so that our people living below the poverty line can get a good life. Peace in South Asia will also benefit the region as a whole. Poverty is our common enemy.

Q#Do you agree that the time has come now to eradicate our nuclear weapons?
A#With our neighbourhood having nuclear weapons, we cannot sit in Tapas. When others remove their nuclear weapons, we will also do so. Our nuclear weapons are for self defense and not first use.

Q#Why are we not getting Nobel Prizes since such a long time?
A#I am sure that once again this will happen in the future.

Q#How can interest, if basic sciences be revived in India?
A#My Government is working towards making high school students interested in pursuing a career in basic sciences as a life long career.

Q#What according to policy maker of India should be done to retain talent in our country? That is to stop brain drain?
A#My personal opinion is, there is no brain drain. Even if, a few person of our students go abroad every year, we still have thousands of other who are equally competent. Indians who go abroad are a benefit to us, as they retain their umbilical connectivity with their motherland.

Q#I want to say that people are going to Science stream and want to become a Doctor, but this reservation system for OBC/SC/ST was done. Do you think that it is right to give reservation to those students? You can provide education to them at primary and secondary level, but do you think giving reservations is right?
A#When the number of institutes of higher education increase, then the question of reservations will become irrelevant. I am working for that.

Q#When we are depressed during our work then how can we motivate ourselves and again restart to achieve our goal?
A#If you do know work, you will have no problems. If you do work, you will face problems. You must not allow the problem to be your master, but you must master the problem.

Q#The environment is changing rapidly like global warning, deficit of water and crops are almost susceptible for this. What will be the happen to the food security of India?
A#In the future, Indian Agriculture faces three challenges. Less land, less farmers and less water to produce more food for more people. Our Scientists will take the help of technology to find the solution.

Q#How do you visualize yourself, as the President, as well as an expert scientist?
A#Wherever I have been, I have worked hard and sweated. I am trying to market the idea of the developed India by 2020.

Q#How can we produce the energy if coal, gas etc run out? What are the other forms of energy towards which we are working for?
A#Research is on various other sources. Sources like solar energy, bio-fuels and hydrogen energy.

Q#What are the current states of Nuclear Energy in India and is it sufficient?
A#Our aim is to increase Nuclear Energy production for electricity as far as possible and we are well on the way.

Q#What will be the fuel for future generations when all the conventional sources of energy will exhaust?
A#Sources like solar energy, bio-fuels and hydrogen energy.

Q#As we know that in some developed countries electricity is being generated by converting waste materials into energy. What is being done in this matter in our country where majority of our villagers go without electricity even today?
A#There are some such projects, which have been undertakan on a small scale, for example in Andhra Pradesh. I am trying to push this idea. It will not only be able to provide electricity but also take care of the solid waste in our cities.

Q#India is an agriculture dominated country. To feed the increasing population, there is over exploitation of natural resources like soil and water. Can joining hands with Europe, solve the problem to meet the food requirement of increasing population keeping in view conservation of soil and water?
A#Conservation of soil and water is important. In the future there will lesser land and lesser water which will have to produce more food for our growing population and also in increasing buying power of the people. We can think of joint research amongst the many other possibilities, but keeping in mind Indian conditions.

Q#Should not we increase the number of medical professionals in India, in comparison to basic scientists because if we see health conditions in rural areas are too bad because of lack of awareness and unavailability of doctors.
A#We need both in large numbers. Scientists for research into basic science and then applying the research for practical daily needs of our people, especially in the rural areas. We also need good doctors in large numbers, but they must serve in the rural areas also.

Q#In many of the Hydroelectric projects carried out in the North East India faces water scarcity at the time of completion of it ? Again River inter-linking is a very big project. What to do now? To skip or to continue it?
A#River Linking is an important project and will benefit the country. Already some work is in progress in Madhya Pradesh to link to small rivers. It shall be an important infrastructure project for our young people.

Q#How the poor villagers can contribute towards the controlling of global warming?
A#By using eco friendly methods. Most of them are already following a life style which is eco friendly.

Q#What is the role of scientist to the society in general?
A#Scientiest should work for the welfare of society, that is the application of their work for the benefit of the common person and especially for people in rural areas.

Q#Science is simply law of nature and about the nature. But science and technology is destroying the beauty of nature as we know that ozone is depleting, global warming increasing day by day. What do you think about this. I think it is not science and technology's use but misuse of it.
A#Science and Technology is innocent. It can be used for both positive and negative purposes. Science and Technology has led to development and that in turn has at times damaged our environment. But, let us not forget that the solutions to this problem are also provided by science and technology.

Q#How can science and technology feed a poor hungry human being?
A#Science and Technology can provide the means for doing things in a cheaper and more efficient way. Science and Technology has led to increase in agriculture yields etc.

Q#How can quality of life be improved through science and technology?
A#Nuclear science has allowed us to irradiate seeds for agricultural purposes and this has helped in the process of food production. There are many such examples.

Q#Most of the poor parents are compelled to use their children as anti-poverty weapon by putting them into child labour and thus making the legislation less effective. I want to ask that what measure would you like to suggest to make the present legislation more effective to poor parents as well?
A#It has been found in many states that the Mid Day Meal scheme in schools has helped retain children in class. This is the way out.

Q#"The cycle in nature are capable of restoring the balance and evolution is the continuous process", then why should we worry so much for the conservation of nature?
A#Nature gives back to us as much as we give to it, therefore as much as we respect it. We need to be worried because we are taking much more from nature than what we are giving it back.

Q#Mr. President don't you feel that the tapping the Natural Source of energy more advantageous than Nuclear Reactors as they are the source of hazardous waste?
A#Nuclear energy is no longer as dangerous in terms of waster material as it used to be about 20 to 30 years ago. Technology has progressed to make it safer.

Q#There had been great mathematicians in the early time from India and from rest of the world like Ramanujam and Aryabhat etc. But recently there had been no such thumping person. Is the work in mathematics declining in India and other parts of the world?
A#There is no decline in mathematics around the world in my opinion. In fact recently Mr. John Nash a Nobel Laureate who got the award in the field of Mathematics was in India.

Q#India is a developing country what development would you make to stand at Ist position in the world of science and technology.
A#Making more youngsters interested in science as a life long career and increase in number of higher institutions of learning teaching subjects related to science and technology.

Q#Fossil fuels like petroleum and coal took millions of years to be formed and now with the rapid pace with which they are being used they will disappear in few years. Other sources of energy like solar power, nuclear power, hydro power are still being developed. So, are we prepared for the time when we will have no fossil fuels?
A#Yes we are prepared for that time. Work and research is going on about alternate renewable fuels and energy.

Q#It is usually said that solar cookers should be used but Sir, I cannot see any solar cookers in the market. How can people have access to them?
A#Solar cooker's can be used for cooking certain types of foods. They are available in shops run by the Government.

Q#India is a hot country. Don?t you think that a strong appreciation is needed to develop green power in the country? For that individual to individual effort is necessary. Do you think that a common Indian is committed to contribute to the country?s green power?
A#Let us not look to the next person. If each one contributes then the sum will be large. Let?s not wait for others to make the start. Lot of research is going on in the field of green energy in India and there is positive development.

Q#What is Science and Technology in your view?
A#The process of using ones brain to find answers to the phenomena around us ? that is science and technology is the process of using science to develop ways to answer those questions.

Q#Young scientists have so many dreams but they can?t put into action due to lack of opportunities available. Only few can enter into world of science due to less no of seats in Universities.
A#As the number of institutions of higher education increase, this will no longer be a problem.

Q#What is more of yourself? ? A scientist or President of India?
A#A teacher.

Q#What are the steps I have to take to become a rocket scientist?
A#Study hard and excel in your Boards by taking PCM combination. After that take admission for aeronautical engineering in a good college.

Q#What is the scope of nano-technology in our daily life?
A#Nano-technology is the frontier technology of the future. Carbon Nano-tubes will make solar cells more efficient thus making solar power in our homes in the future a cheap source of energy. In the same way nano-technology will help make cheaper cure in medicines etc.

Q#Why don't we have our Indian scientist achieving glory in space as scientist of Indian origin like Sunita Williams?
A#The ISRO is working to put a an Indian into space in the long term. I am sure that it will happen.

Q#As science develops new technology pollution is increasing. Is there any work going on to control pollution?
A#Work is going on around the world to develop alternative clean energy technologies to reduce dependence on fossil fuels which are renewable.

Q#Every now and then we come to know that India will be ahead of USA by 2045. May I know during this span of time USA will be sitting idle and there will be no further development in USA?
A#India will be one of the top three economies of the world by around 2045 based on size. The USA will continue to be the largest economy based on size even then. The USA will not stop to develop its economy but India?s speed of economic development is expected to be faster and thus it will reach the third position based on size of its economy.

Q#Can we develop such a software which could restrict our confidential areas like defence and administration which are easily accessible on sites like googleearth.com?
A#Definitely there can be.

Q#Till now crores have been spent in improving the Yamuna River, but till now no improvement has been seen. What is the reason?
A#What is required is a mission mode approach with defined targets and determination.

Q#Is Vigyan an opponent of Dharma?
A#No. Science and religion are not opponents. While science tries to find solutions to the problems of human society, religion attempts also to do the same.

Q#What will be our future after being a scientist, because it takes a lot of years for a person to get profits and sometimes his experiments are identified after his death?
A#Those who take up a career as scientists and research into pure science are not attracted by profits but by the challenge of science and passion.

Q#If any good person don't want to be a political leader then what will future of India be?
A#We need good people to enter politics.

Q#Are there some sites where we can learn and clear our concepts in science?
A#The Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) has recently launched a very good e-learning site called SAKSHAT.

Q#When will e-education start in India?
A#E-education has already started in India in many places. India is one of the few countries in the world to have a dedicated satellite in space dedicated to e-education. It is called EDUSAT.

Q#How can a government leave people helpless after displacing them or offering them jobs for which they are not trained? How can science help such people who are displaced by developmental project?
A#Science and technology can be used to teach them skills or upgrade their skills and thus make such people fit to take up new jobs and vocations.

Q#What is the role of science in solving social issues & dealing with inequalities?
A#Science and technology has a role but not the only role. Science and technology can bring solutions to the problems of the poor to their door steps and at a cheap price, thus reducing their problems and in many cases increasing their incomes, thus reducing inequalities

Q#Can traits like honesty, respect to elders, self discipline be produced by science and technology?
A#All these traits cannot be produced by science technology, but by upbringing by the mother and the father and the influence of good teachers in the primary school. Also, environment also plays an important role.

Q#Sir, why can?t we do a survey in rural areas to come to know what and how they want to learn and take education for them from, much more than Mid Day Meal?
A#The Mid Day Meal scheme has proved to be successful wherever it has been implemented, as it helps keep children in schools, as most of the parents of such children are poor and cannot afford their mid day meals. If they had not been given mid day meals they would have been taken away to the fields to work with their parents thus losing out on education.

Q#The present Indian education system makes science only theoretical which is miles apart from practical surroundings. Our minds are bound to think within the walls of theories. How can our minds be let free to flow in creativity by the change in education system?
A#It is not true that our educational system is only such that students are taught within the walls of theory. Wherever there are good teachers, they teach both theory supplemented by practical knowledge. However I do agree that our education system need change in the age group 5 to 12 where it needs to emphasise more on creativity. I am working to reduce the burden of heavy bags loaded with books in this age group.

Q#Why can't we promote our budding talent to scale heights as Indian scientists besides scientists of Indian origin as Sunita Williams?
A#I am suggesting the establishment of a permanent cadre of scientists selected from students from Post Graduate level, who would be provided life long job security to pursue careers in pure science. That way we can promote our own young science talent.

Q#What are you doing to bring the ISRO to the level of NASA?
A#The ISRO is already an international level organization. Dr. Madhavan Nair the Chairman of the ISRO is already steering the organization to a new level, with the successful return of the satellite which went into space and returned successfully. This has proved our re-entry technology. In 2008 India shall be sending the Chandrayan spacecraft to the Moon and landing a payload.

Q#There are some diseases which are genetic and are inherited by the child from the parent(s) through their genes. So can we develop such a technology which can change the gene during pregnancy?
A#There is research going on Chennai on this. Efforts are one to identify the genes which can cause certain diseases to develop in a child after growing up, so that they can be changed in the pregnancy stage itself.

Q#Why don?t teachers motivate students by telling the stories of scientists to make them think in the way scientists thought before they proposed their theory that we are studying today?
A#Definitely teachers can motivate their students by telling them about famous people such as scientists. When I was studying at St. Joseph?s College in Trichy, once a week the senior teacher used to give us a class of about one hour about one famous personality. This used to be called the moral science class. Schools can take this up today.

Q#Is it the examination system which makes our teachers to apply hands tied approach to science education? How can it be made more interesting?
A#Good teachers have a passion to teach and they can make any subject interesting and any student interested in the subject. There is a lack of good teachers these days. That makes tele-education very important as it will benefit students at various locations as one good teacher in a particular subject will teach them.

Q#Why don't teachers teach with so much of interest that students enjoy their studies more than their sports? Is it because of heavy syllabus? If this is the reason then what are we gaining from heavy syllabus?
A#Good teachers have a passion to teach and they can make any subject interesting and any student interested in the subject. There is a lack of good teachers these days. That makes tele-education very important as it will benefit students at various locations as one good teacher in a particular subject will teach them.

Q#I want to know that what you feel difference in post of Indian President and as a scientist of DRDO according to your experience?
A#In both posts one has to put in hard work, in that sense there is no difference in the two posts.

Q#Can traits like honesty, respect to elders, self discipline be produced by science and technology?
A#All these traits cannot be produced by science technology, but by upbringing by the mother and the father and the influence of good teachers in the primary school. Also, environment also plays an important role. 
